pradyumno raukmiṇeya: sa khalu tava kalā śambareṇāhṛtastaṃ
hatvā ratyā sahāpto nijapuramaharadrukmikanyāṃ ca dhanyām |
tatputro'thāniruddho guṇanidhiravahadrocanāṃ rukmipautrīṃ
tatrodvāhe gatastvaṃ nyavadhi musalinā rukmyapi dyūtavairāt ||1||
pradyumna: raukmiṇeya:	Pradyumna, Rukmini's son
sa khalu tava kalā	he indeed Thy part incarnation
śambareṇa-āhṛta:-	by Shambara was kidnapped
taṃ hatvā	him killing
ratyā saha-āpta:	with Rati returned
nijapuram-	to his own city
aharat-rukmi-kanyāṃ	took away Rukmi's daughter
ca dhanyāṃ	and she the fortunate one
tat-putra:-atha-	his son then
aniruddha: guṇanidhi:-	Aniruddha, very virtuous
avahat-rocanām	married Rochanaa
rukmi pautrīm	Rukmi's grand daughter
tatra-udvāhe gata:-tvaṃ	there, in that wedding Thou went
nyavadhi musalinā	was killed by Balaraam
rukmi-api	Rukmi also
dyūta-vairāt	in the game of dice animosity
Pradyumna, Rukmini's son was an aspect of Thy essence and was kidnapped by Shambara at birth. Later Pradyumna killed Shambara and returned to his city of Dwaarikaa with his wife Rati. He also carried away the fortunate daughter of Rukmi and married her. His virtuous son Aniruddha married Rochanaa, the grand daughter of Rukmi. Thou had gone to that wedding. During a game of dice, when a quarrel arose, Rukmi was killed by Balaraam.
bāṇasya sā balisutasya sahasrabāho-
rmāheśvarasya mahitā duhitā kiloṣā |
tvatpautramenamaniruddhamadṛṣṭapūrvaṃ
svapne'nubhūya bhagavan virahāturā'bhūt ||2||
bāṇasya sā	of Baana, she
bali-sutasya	of Bali's son (Baan)
sahasra-bāho:-	of a thousand arms
māheśvarasya	devotee of Shiva
mahitā duhitā	the esteemed daughter
kila-uṣā	indeed Ushaa
tvat-pautram-enam-	Thy grandson this
aniruddham-adṛṣṭa-pūrvam	Aniruddha not seen before
svapne-anubhūya	in the dream meeting
bhagavan	O Lord!
viraha-āturā-abhūt	separation pangs suffered
Bali's son Baana was a devotee of Shiva and had a thousand arms. His esteemed daughter Ushaa had not seen Thy grandson Aniruddha before. She met him in her dreams and suffered pangs of separation from him.
yoginyatīva kuśalā khalu citralekhā
tasyā: sakhī vilikhatī taruṇānaśeṣān |
tatrāniruddhamuṣayā viditaṃ niśāyā-
māneṣṭa yogabalato bhavato niketāt ||3||
yoginī-	a woman with yogic powers
atīva kuśalā	and very skilled
khalu citralekhā	indeed Chitralekhaa
tasyā: sakhi	her (Ushaa's) friend
vilikhatī	draws (pictures)
taruṇān-aśeṣān	of young men all
tatra-aniruddham-	from there, Aniruddha
uṣayā viditaṃ	by Ushaa was recognized
niśāyām-āneṣṭa	during the night, brought (Chitralekhaa)
yoga-balata:	by yogic powers
bhavata: niketāt	from Thy palace
Ushaa's friend Chitralekhaa had yogic powers and was very skilled in making drawings. She drew portraits of all the young men. Ushaa picked up Aniruddha's portrait whom she recognized. Chitralekhaa with her yogic powers then brought Aniruddha from Thy palace during the night.
kanyāpure dayitayā sukhamāramantaṃ
cainaṃ kathañcana babandhuṣi śarvabandhau |
śrīnāradoktatadudantadurantaroṣai-
stvaṃ tasya śoṇitapuraṃ yadubhirnyarundhā: ||4||
kanyā-pure	in the virgin's chambers
dayitayā	with his beloved (Ushaa)
sukham-āramantaṃ	happily sporting
ca-enam kathañcana	and him somehow
babandhuṣi	tied up
śarvabandhau	Shiva's devotee
śrī-nārada-ukta-	by Shree Naarada told
tat-udanta-	that news
duranta:-roṣai:-tvaṃ	(in) unbounded anger Thou
tasya śoṇitapuraṃ	his (city) Shonitpura
yadubhi:-nyarundhā:	with Yadus besieged
In the virgin's chamber, Aniruddha sported happily with his beloved Ushaa. Baana, Shivaa's devotee came to know this and tied him up. This news was given to Thee by Shree Naarad. In a fit of unbounded anger, Thou besieged Baana's city Shonitpura with the help of the Yaadavas.
purīpālaśśailapriyaduhitṛnātho'sya bhagavān
samaṃ bhūtavrātairyadubalamaśaṅkaṃ nirurudhe |
mahāprāṇo bāṇo jhaṭiti yuyudhānenayuyudhe
guha: pradyumnena tvamapi purahantrā jaghaṭiṣe ||5||
purīpāla:-	the protector of the city
śaila-priya-duhitṛ-nātha:-asya	the mountain's dear daughter's consort, his
bhagavān	Lord Shiva
samaṃ bhūtavrātai:-	with the Bhoota army
yadu-balam-aśaṅkaṃ	the Yaadava army fearlessly
nirurudhe	blocked
mahāprāṇa: bāṇa:	the mighty Baana
jhaṭiti	quickly
yuyudhānena yuyudhe	with Yuyudhaana fought
guha: pradyumnena	Guha with Pradyumna
tvam-api	Thou too
purahantrā jaghaṭiṣe	(with) Tripura destroyer Shiva
The consort of the mountain's dear daughter, Shiva, being the protector of the city, with his army of the Bhootas blocked the army of the Yadavas, fearlessly. The mighty Baana quickly gave fight to Yuyudhaana, Guha to Pradyumna and Thou to Shiva, the destroyer of the Puras.
niruddhāśeṣāstre mumuhuṣi tavāstreṇa giriśe
drutā bhūtā bhītā: pramathakulavīrā: pramathitā: |
parāskandt skanda: kusumaśarabāṇaiśca saciva:
sa kumbhāṇḍo bhāṇḍaṃ navamiva balenāśu bibhide ||6||
niruddha-aśeṣa-astre	resisted were all the weapons
mumuhuṣi	became unconscious
tava-astreṇa giriśe	by Thy weapon, Shiva
drutā:-bhūtā:-bhītā:	fled the Bhootas in fear
pramatha-kula-vīrā:	of the Pramatha dynasty, the leader
pramathitā:	were crushed
parāskandat skanda:	was defeated Skanda (guha)
kusuma-śara-bāṇai:-ca	by the flower bows's arrows of Pradyumna and
saciva: sa kumbhāṇḍa:	the minister of Baana, that Kumbhaanda
bhāṇḍaṃ navam-iva	a pot new as though
balena-āśu bibhide	by Balaram was soon smashed
All Shiva's weapons were resisted and he was rendered unconscious by Thy weapon (Mohanaastra). All the army of the Bhootas fled in fear and the leaders of the Pramathas were crushed. Skanda was defeated, by the flower arrows of Pradyumna's bow. The minister of Baana, Kumbhaanda was soon smashed by Balaraam like a new pot.
cāpānāṃ pañcaśatyā prasabhamupagate chinnacāpe'tha bāṇe
vyarthe yāte sameto jvarapatiraśanairajvari tvajjvareṇa |
jñānī stutvā'tha datvā tava caritajuṣāṃ vijvaraṃ sa jvaro'gāt
prāyo'ntarjñānavanto'pi ca bahutamasā raudraceṣṭā hi raudrā: ||7||
cāpānāṃ pañcaśatyā	by bows five hundred
prasabham-upagate	fiercely attacking
chinna-cāpe-atha bāṇe	breaking of the bows then of Baana
vyarthe yāta:	fruitlessly returning
sameta: jvarapati:-	came the head of all fevers the Shaiva fever
aśanai:-ajvari	immediately tormented
tvat-jvareṇa	by Thy (the Vaishnava fever)
jñānī stutvā-atha	the enlightened (Shaiva fever) praising then
datvā tava caritajuṣāṃ	giving to the (devotees) admirers of Thy excellences
vijvaraṃ sa jvara:-agāt	freedom, that (Shaiva) fever went away
prāya:-anta:-jñānvanta:-api	often inner knowledge having even
ca bahu-tamasā	and by much of Tamas
raudra-ceṣṭā hi raudrā:	ferociously act indeed the Rudras
Baana came attacking ferociously with 500 bows and arrows, but his weapons being severed he had to retreat. Thereupon, the head of all the obsession, the Shaiva obsession came to the forefront but was immediately put out by the Vaishnava obsession. The enlightened Shaivas gave freedom to all those that sung Thy excellences and went away praising Thee. Often the enlightened Rudras also act ferociously, being predominated by Tamas.
bāṇaṃ nānāyudhograṃ punarabhipatitaṃ darpadoṣādvitanvan
nirlūnāśeṣadoṣaṃ sapadi bubudhuṣā śaṅkareṇopagīta: |
tadvācā śiṣṭabāhudvitayamubhayato nirbhayaṃ tatpriyaṃ taṃ
muktvā taddattamāno nijapuramagama: sāniruddha: sahoṣa: ||8||
bāṇaṃ nānā-āyudha-ugram	Baana with various weapons more ferocious
puna:-abhipatitaṃ	again having attacked
darpa-doṣāt-vitanvan	due to the vice of arrogance, made him
nirlūna-aśeṣa-doṣaṃ	by cutting off all his vices (arms)
sapadi bubudhuṣā	soon (a) realized (person)
śaṅkareṇa-upagīta:	by Shankara and praised (Thee)
tat-vācā	by his request
śiṣṭa-bāhu-dvitayam-ubhayata:	left with arms two on both sides
nirbhayaṃ tat-priyaṃ taṃ	unafraid his devotee him
muktvā	letting off
tat-datta-māna:	by him giving honour
nija-puram-agama:	to Thy own city returned
sāniruddha sahoṣa:	with Aniruddha (and) with Ushaa
Baana again attacked ferociously full of arrogance with his many various weapons. Thou made him devoid of all vice and his many arms by cutting them off. Shankara soon realised Thy greatness and praised Thee and on his request Thou let off Baana with his two arms on both sides. Baana who was then spared from the fear of death honoured Thee. Thou then returned to Thy city Dwaarikaa with Aniruddha and Ushaa.
muhustāvacchakraṃ varuṇamajayo nandaharaṇe
yamaṃ bālānītau davadahanapāne'nilasakham |
vidhiṃ vatsasteye giriśamiha bāṇasya samare
vibho viśvotkarṣī tadayamavatāro jayati te ||9||
muhu:-tāvat-śakraṃ	again and again then Indra
varuṇam-ajaya:	Varuna defeated
nanda-haraṇe	when he had kidnapped Nanda Gopa
yamaṃ bāla-ānītau	Yama when he had taken away the (Guru's) children
dava-dahana-pāne-	the forest fire by drinking
anila-sakham	wind's friend Agni
vidhiṃ vatsa-steye	Brahmaa when the calves were stolen
giriśam-ih	Shiva here
bāṇasya samare	in Baana's battle
vibho	O Lord!
viśva-utkarṣī	all excelling
tat-ayam-avatāra:	therefore this incarnation (of Thee) (as Krishna)
jayati te	excels Thine
Thou indeed defeated Indra again and again, Varuna was defeated when he kidnapped Nandagopa and Yama was defeated by Thee when he took away the children of Thy Guru. Agni, Vayu's friend was overcome when Thou drank it during the forest fire and Brahmaa was defeated when he stole away the calves. Shiva was defeated here in Baana's battle. Therefore, O Lord! this incarnation of Thee excels and wins over all other of Thy incarnations.
dvijaruṣā kṛkalāsavapurdharaṃ nṛganṛpaṃ tridivālayamāpayan |
nijajane dvijabhaktimanuttamāmupadiśan pavaneśvar pāhi mām ||10||
dvija-ruṣā	by a holy Braahmin's anger
kṛkalāsa:-vapu:-dharaṃ	in a chameleon's body form
nṛga-nṛpaṃ	Nriga king
tridiva-ālayam-	to the god's abode (heaven)
āpayan	sending
nija-jane	in Thy people (devotees)
dvija-bhaktim-anuttamām-	for Braahminas respect supreme
upadiśan	instructing
pavaneśvara pāhi mām	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
King Nriga who was reduced to the body of a chameleon by a holy Braahmin's curse, was purified and sent to heaven by Thee. By this Thou instructed Thy devotees to have supreme respect for holy Braahmins. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Save me.